DOCSP-30536: retrieve data funs (#12)
mongodb/docs-rust: source/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/retrieve.txt

.. _rust-retrieve-guide:

==============
Retrieve Data
==============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve data from your MongoDB
collections using **read operations**.

Read operations allow you to perform the following actions:

- Retrieve documents from your collections by using :ref:`find
  operations <rust-retrieve-find>`
- Transform documents in your collections by using
  :ref:`aggregation operations <rust-retrieve-aggregation>`

> Sample Data

Author: Including "Read Operation" in the header seems redundant, since the page doesn't have other examples

> Sample Data

Reviewer: This suggestion is related to "Provide more details in the header". Prior to this section, the reader has no idea what the format of the page, including whether there are any examples as well as sample data. The suggested wording would provide a hint as to what the sample data is for (upcoming examples).

The other option I listed is to introduce the upcoming sections in the overview in which case you wouldn't need to provide more details which is probably preferable.

> Sample Data

Author: adding detail to overview

~~~~~~~~~~~

.. TODO decide on structs in crud

To run the examples in this guide, load the sample data into a
collection called ``db.inventory`` with the following code:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/retrieve.rs
   :language: rust
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-insert
   :end-before: end-insert

> .. include:: /includes/fundamentals/automatic-creation.rst

Author: omitted since no longer using an insert snippet

Each document represents an item in a store's inventory and contains
information about its quantity and the last time a restock was ordered.

.. _rust-retrieve-find:

Find Operations
---------------

Use **find operations** to retrieve data from MongoDB. Find operations
consist of the ``find()`` and ``find_one()`` methods.

Find All Matching Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``find()`` method takes a query filter as a parameter. The method

Author: added todo for specify a query

a ``FindOptions`` or ``FindOneOptions`` type to the matching method.
If you don't specify any options, the driver uses the default values for
each setting.

The following table describes commonly used settings that you can specify in
``FindOptions`` and ``FindOneOptions``:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``collation`` 
     - | The type of language collation to use when sorting results.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | The index to use for the operation.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``projection`` 
     - | The projection to use when returning results.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``read_concern`` 
     - | The read concern to use for the find operation. If you don't
         set a read concern, the operation inherits the one set for the
         collection. To learn more about read concerns, see
         :manual:`Read Concern </reference/read-concern/>`
         in the Server manual.

   * - ``skip`` 
     - | The number of documents to skip when returning results.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``sort`` 
     - | The sort to use when returning results.  

>        | Default: ``nil``

Author: It is the order that documents are matched

For a full list of settings you can specify for each type, see the :ref:`API
documentation <rust-crud-retrieve-api>` for ``FindOptions`` and
``FindOneOptions``.

> Examples

Author: added cross links

~~~~~~~~

find() Example
``````````````

The following example passes a filter and ``FindOptions`` to
the ``find()`` method to perform the following actions:

> - Matches documents where the value of ``last_ordered`` is before 2018

Author: changed data - no longer relevant

  and the value of ``quantity`` is below ``100``

> - Sorts matched documents in descending order by ``quantity``

Author: changed in both

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/retrieve.rs
      :start-after: begin-find-many
      :end-before: end-find-many
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      * { "_id": ObjectId("..."), "item": "watering can", "quantity": 19, "last_ordered": DateTime("2017-11-01 ...") }
      * { "_id": ObjectId("..."), "item": "basket", "quantity": 56, "last_ordered": DateTime("2017-03-15 ...") }

find_one() Example
``````````````````

The following example passes a filter and ``FindOneOptions`` to
the ``find_one()`` method to perform the following actions:

- Matches documents where the value of ``quantity`` is at least ``20``
- Skips the first two matched documents

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/retrieve.rs
      :start-after: begin-find-one
      :end-before: end-find-one
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

>       * { "_id": ObjectId("..."), "item": "placemat", "quantity": 80, "last_ordered": DateTime("2018-07-15 ...") }

Reviewer: Question:
I think the output can be difficult to read since it requires horizontal scrolling. Is there some command to convert the result to JSON and format it with indentations and linebreaks?

Author: Adding a formatter

- Groups documents by the ``year_last_ordered`` field and calculates the
  sum of the ``quantity`` fields for each year
- Sets an ascending sort on the ``year_last_ordered`` field

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/retrieve.rs
      :start-after: begin-agg
      :end-before: end-agg
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      * { "_id": { "year_last_ordered": 2018 }, "remaining_qty": 181 }
      * { "_id": { "year_last_ordered": 2017 }, "remaining_qty": 75 }
      * { "_id": { "year_last_ordered": 2016 }, "remaining_qty": 214 }

Additional Information
----------------------

.. TODO For runnable examples of the find operations, see the following usage
.. examples:
.. 
.. - :ref:`rust-find-one`
.. - :ref:`rust-find-multiple`

.. TODO To learn more about the operations mentioned, see the following
.. guides:
.. 
.. - :ref:`rust-query-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-cursor-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-skip-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-sort-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-limit-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-project-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-aggregation-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-collations-guide`

> .. _rust-crud-retrieve-api:

Reviewer: Issue:
[Make link text clear
](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/links-and-cross-references/#make-link-text-clear
)

> Strive to be clear about where exactly a link will take a reader. 

I think assigning links entitled "API documentation" are confusing because I would have expected to see the actual API documentation for the specified function, not a list of links that go to API documentation.
I think it is easy to forget what link you clicked if you cross-link to a section from which you need to find another link to click.

Suggestion:
I think it would be good to keep this section for anyone that might reach the end of the doc, but do not cross-link to it. Instead, when describing the link, go directly to the API docs. E.g. 
"For a full list of settings you can specify for each type, see the API documentation for`FindOptions <{+api+}/options/struct.FindOptions.html>`__ and `FindOneOptions <{+api+}/options/struct.FindOneOptions.html>`__
"

Otherwise, omit mention of the API docs if it's not necessary.

API Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To learn more about any of the methods or types discussed in this
guide, see the following API Documentation:

- `find_one() <{+api+}/struct.Collection.html#method.find_one>`__

> - `Option <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html>`__

Author: Option includes `Some` and `None,` which are the return types for `find_one()`

> - `Option <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html>`__

Author: I can link the specific variants instead

> - `Option <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html>`__

Author: In the documentation, I can't see an option to change versions

> - `Option <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html>`__

Reviewer: Could be a good question for the Rust DBX team on what's the best place to link to, but I found https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/option/enum.Option.html

  retrieve documents from your collections
- :ref:`Aggregation operations <rust-retrieve-aggregation>`, which allow
  you to transform the data in your collections

Sample Data for Examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. TODO decide on structs in crud

The examples in this guide use the following sample documents. Each
document represents an item in a store's inventory and contains
information about its categorization and unit price:

.. code-block:: json
   
   { "item": "candle", "category": "decor", "unit_price": 2.89 },
   { "item": "blender", "category": "kitchen", "unit_price": 38.49 },
   { "item": "placemat", "category": "kitchen", "unit_price": 3.19 },
   { "item": "watering can", "category": "garden", "unit_price": 11.99 }

.. _rust-retrieve-find:

Find Operations
---------------

Use **find operations** to retrieve data from MongoDB. Find operations
consist of the ``find()`` and ``find_one()`` methods.

Find All Matching Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``find()`` method takes a query filter as a parameter. The method
returns *all* documents that match the filter criteria.

If any documents match the filter criteria, the method returns a ``Cursor``

> type that contains these documents. If it does not match any documents,

Reviewer: Suggestion:
I think "Cursor type that contains these documents" might not be completely accurate since "contains" implies that they're stored inside. A cursor is a data structure that resembles a pointer -- it can retrieve a result set, but does not contain them.

"returns a Cursor type that you can access to retrieve the results."

> it returns an empty ``Cursor`` type.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
I think it could be helpful to explain what it means to be "empty". If there's a method they can call to check that it is an empty Cursor type, I think that is worth mentioning. Otherwise, what differentiates it from a Cursor that is pointing to a non-empty result set?

Author: reworded to not discuss two cases, because a `Cursor` is returned either way

To see an example that uses this method to retrieve data, see
the :ref:`find() example <rust-find-example>`.

.. TODO To learn about query filters, see :ref:`Specify a Query <...>`.
.. TODO To learn how to access data from a cursor, see :ref:`rust-cursor-guide`.

Find One Document
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``find_one()`` method takes a query filter as a parameter. The
method returns *the first document* that matches the filter criteria. If
a document matches the filter criteria, the method returns a ``Some``
type. If it does not match any documents, it returns a ``None`` type.

To see an example that uses this method to retrieve data, see
the :ref:`find_one() example <rust-find-one-example>`.

.. _rust-retrieve-options:

Modify Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can modify the behavior of ``find()`` by passing
a ``FindOptions`` instance as a parameter, and you can modify the
behavior of ``find_one()`` by passing a ``FindOneOptions`` instance.

> To use default values for each setting, specify ``None`` for the options

Author: changed in both places

parameter.

The following table describes commonly used settings that you can specify in
``FindOptions`` and ``FindOneOptions``:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``collation`` 
     - | The collation to use when sorting results.
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | The index to use for the operation.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``projection`` 
     - | The projection to use when returning results.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``read_concern`` 
     - | The read concern to use for the find operation. If you don't
         set a read concern, the operation inherits the one set for the
         collection. To learn more about read concerns, see
         :manual:`Read Concern </reference/read-concern/>`

>          in the Server manual.

Author: added a few links and TODOs for unwritten content

         aggregation stages can write data to the ``_tmp`` subdirectory in the
         ``dbPath`` directory.

       | Default: ``false``

   * - ``batch_size`` 
     - The number of documents the server should return in each cursor batch.

   * - ``collation``
     - | The collation to use when sorting results.
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | The index to use for the operation.  
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``read_concern`` 
     - | The read concern to use for the find operation. If you don't
         set a read concern, the operation inherits the one set for the
         collection. To learn more about read concerns, see
         :manual:`Read Concern </reference/read-concern/>`
         in the Server manual.

   * - ``write_concern`` 
     - | The write concern to use for the find operation. If you don't
         set a write concern, the operation inherits the one set for the
         collection. To learn more about write concerns, see
         :manual:`Write Concern </reference/write-concern/>`
         in the Server manual.

.. TODO link to collation fundamentals page under collations setting

For a full list of settings, see the :ref:`API

> documentation <rust-crud-retrieve-api>` for ``AggregateOptions``.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

Re: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-rust/pull/12/files#r1271146081

> I think it would be good to keep this section for anyone that might reach the end of the doc, but do not cross-link to it. Instead, when describing the link, go directly to the API docs.

To clarify I think it would be better to link directly to "<{+api+}/options/struct.AggregateOptions.html>`__" rather than clicking one link to go to the bottom (rust-crud-retrieve-api) of the page and then trying to figure out what they were looking for in the list of API documentation links.

      :dedent:

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      {
        "_id": { "category": "garden" },
        "avg_price": 11.99
      }
      {
        "_id": { "category": "decor" },
        "avg_price": 2.89
      }
      {
        "_id": { "category": "kitchen" },
        "avg_price": 20.84
      }

Additional Information
----------------------

.. TODO For runnable examples of the find operations, see the following usage
.. examples:
.. 
.. - :ref:`rust-find-one`
.. - :ref:`rust-find-multiple`

.. TODO To learn more about the operations mentioned, see the following
.. guides:
.. 
.. - :ref:`rust-query-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-cursor-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-skip-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-sort-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-limit-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-project-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-aggregation-guide`
.. - :ref:`rust-collations-guide`

.. _rust-crud-retrieve-api:

API Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To learn more about the methods and types discussed in this
guide, see the following API Documentation:

- `find_one() <{+api+}/struct.Collection.html#method.find_one>`__
- `Some <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html#variant.Some>`__

> - `None <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/option/enum.Option.html#variant.None>`__

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think this section should refer to the API documentation for the driver rather than core Rust documentation. Since I think "Some" and "None" are fairly common in Rust, I don't think there's much value in including links to them in our docs unless there's a specific need, such as explaining a bug/limitation.

Author: removing these entries

.. _rust-retrieve-guide:

=============
Retrieve Data
=============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve data from your MongoDB
collections using **read operations**. Read operations are commands that
retrieve documents from the server.

There are two types of read operations:

- Find operations, which allow you to retrieve documents from your collections
- Aggregation operations, which allow you to transform the data in your collections

This guide includes the following sections:

> - :ref:`Sample Data for Examples <rust-retrieve-sample-data>`: Provides
>   and describes the sample data that is used by the examples

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think "provides and describes" could be described more tersely as "presents". I think it might also be slightly better to specify what kind of examples this refers to.

```suggestion
- :ref:`Sample Data for Examples <rust-retrieve-sample-data>`: presents
  the sample data that is used by the read operation examples
```

- :ref:`Find Operations <rust-retrieve-find>`: Describes how to use the
  driver to execute find operations

- :ref:`Aggregation Operations <rust-retrieve-aggregation>`: Describes how to use the
  driver to execute aggregation operations

- :ref:`Additional Information <rust-crud-retrieve-addtl-info>`:
  Provides links to additional resources and API documentation for types

>   and methods mentioned in this guide

Reviewer: Issue:

The sentence following a colon should not be capitalized unless the colon is followed by two or more sentences according to the Chicago Manual of Style. I think I provided this reference in another PR since there's a paywall:
https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-after-colons/

Suggestion:
I think it would be best to follow the CMoS recommendation of using lowercase after the colons in these instances.

.. _rust-retrieve-sample-data:

Sample Data for Examples
------------------------

.. TODO decide on structs in crud

The examples in this guide use the following sample documents. Each
document represents an item in a store's inventory and contains
information about its categorization and unit price:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "item": "candle", "category": "decor", "unit_price": 2.89 },
   { "item": "blender", "category": "kitchen", "unit_price": 38.49 },
   { "item": "placemat", "category": "kitchen", "unit_price": 3.19 },
   { "item": "watering can", "category": "garden", "unit_price": 11.99 }

.. _rust-retrieve-find:

Find Operations
---------------

Use **find operations** to retrieve data from MongoDB. Find operations

> consist of the ``find()`` and ``find_one()`` methods.

Reviewer 2: Should the `_with_session` variants be covered here?

Reviewer 3: I've added a paragraph on the `_with_session` methods!

Find All Matching Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To find *all of the documents* that match your criteria, use the
``find()`` method. This method takes a query filter as a parameter. A
query filter consists of the fields and values that form criteria for

> documents to match.

Reviewer: Good description!

Suggestion:
No changes needed, but I wonder if it would be effective to do one of the following to help a reader confirm their understanding of a query filter:
- link to more info on query filters (perhaps https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/document/#query-filter-documents)
- provide an example of a query filter

Author: There will be a link to the Specify a Query page when that's made
